On a hot, sunny morning in June 2010, 300
young humpback chub were released by fisheries
biologists into Shinumo Creek within the heart
of Grand Canyon National Park. For these small
fish, it was the final leg of a remarkable
journey. They had been captured the year before
as fingerlings in the Little Colorado River,
and had spent the winter growing and feeding
in hatchery pools. Their momentous final journey
began with a flight in the park helicopter
to a landing spot adjacent to Shinumo Creek.
After landing, they were quickly transferred
into buckets, acclimated to the creekís water,
and then allowed to swim free into their new
home.
For National Park Service biologists, the
translocation of these humpback chub into
Shinumo Creek was but a single milestone in
a multi-year conservation experiment to establish
an aggregation, or small population, of the
Colorado Riverís most emblematic native fish
in a Grand Canyon tributary. The endangered
humpback chub were once one of the most abundant
fish in Grand Canyon. Only a few remnant populations
of humpback chub exist in the world; and today,
the largest population is found near the confluence
of the Colorado and the Little Colorado Rivers
in Grand Canyon.
In 2009, the National Park Service initiated
this important experiment for the conservation
of humpback chub, a large member of the minnow
family that is endemic to the Colorado River.
An endangered fish species such as humpback
chub that exists mostly in a single river
drainage is at risk: a catastrophic event
in that drainage could have devastating impacts
on the population downstream. Therefore, biologists
are exploring ways to increase the population
of humpback chub throughout its former range.
[Brian Healy] ìThe translocation of humpback
chub to Shinumo Creek will hopefully in the
future will provide us with some important
knowledge on how Ö to conserve the species
in Grand Canyon.î
Shinumo Creek is a small, clear stream that
joins the Colorado River deep in the heart
of Grand Canyon. Two species of native fish,
bluehead suckers and speckled dace, are found
in the stream, along with nonnative rainbow
trout that were stocked there in the 1930s.
A fifteen foot waterfall located just above
the mouth of Shinumo Creek prevents nonnative
fish in the Colorado River from moving into
the stream, effectively isolating acceptable
humpback chub habitat. Fisheries biologists
chose Shinumo Creek for the first translocation
experiment based on the presence of this barrier
fall and the fact that Shinumo Creek has suitable
water chemistry and temperature for humpback
chub.
The 2010 release of humpback chub into Shinumo
Creek was the second of three planned translocations
to the stream. A multi-faceted monitoring
program is an essential part of this scientific
experiment. Twice per year, crews survey the
creek using established fisheries techniques.
[Melissa Trammell] ìAnd also hopefully get
a population estimate of what remains in the
creek by doing a full 2-pass mark recapture
estimate in the creek. So we took our hoop
nets, and we have the creek divided into 4
different reaches. And we set two reaches
on one day, and two reaches the next day,
and then we go back up and do it again. So
on the first pass, you collect all the fish,
[and [um] all the HBC are already PIT-tagged,
they come PIT-tagged from the hatchery where
they stayed over winter. And then [ah] Ö.EDIT
OUT] You estimate the population by looking
at the ratio of marked to unmarked fish in
your second pass.î
Each humpback chub released into Shinumo Creek
has a PIT tag, or microchip, in its abdomen
that uniquely identifies each fish.
[Trammell] ìÖ.Another sampling device that
we installed in the creek is an actual antenna.
Itís just a Ö couple hundred meters above
the barrier falls. Its two PVC rectangular
blocks set down into the river, and it has
a remote reader that has a satellite uplink
to it. And so, when a fish that has a little
PIT tag in it swims through the antenna, the
reader records thatÖî
During monitoring prior to the 2010 release,
biologist captured a number of humpback chub
that had been released in Shinumo Creek in
2009.
[Trammell] ìOh, the chub that we caught this
year were just wonderful. They just look great.
Theyíre fat and theyíre growing, and their
fins all look good.î
Biologists will continue to monitor the population
of humpback chub and other native fish in
Shinumo Creek in coming years to assess the
outcome of the translocations there.
These initial translocation efforts are considered
experimental. However, depending on the success
in Shinumo Creek, future translocation efforts
may contribute to the National Park Serviceís
goal to restore native fish communities in
Grand Canyon. Translocations to tributaries
such as Shinumo Creek may result in improved
survival for juvenile humpback chub by providing
better rearing habitat than in the colder
Colorado River. This translocation of young
humpback chub to Shinumo Creek may itself
be a step in a larger journey for the speciesóone
leading to recovery.